Imaging an Explosion: the Orion BN/KL Project
=============================================

Explosions like that observed around the Orion BN/KL nebula are commonplace in
massive star forming regions: without systematic study, comparable explosions
have been discovered in G34.26+0.15 and DR21 and are likely to be found in many
other massive star forming complexes.  The presence of such explosions in many
of the nearest regions of massive star formation hints that this process is
ubiquitous in massive star formation, perhaps occuring on average once for each
OB star!

It is therefore essential to understand the nature of these explosions in order
to understand massive star formation within a clustered environment.  Some key
outstanding questions for this type of explosion mechanism are:

   * What causes these explosions?  
   * What effect do they have on the surrounding core?  Do they disrupt it?
   * What effect do they have on the stars involved?  Do those stars continue
     to accrete additional material, or does their formation halt when the
     explosion occurs?
   * What is the end fate of the mass involved in the explosion?  Does it
     escape, avoiding further involvement in this generation of star formation,
     or sweep up additional material to become trapped in further core
     formation?

Many of these questions have been at least partially addressed, or at least
there are promising theories to describe them.


Our Observations
----------------


We have imaged the Orion BN/KL nebula in the emission lines of H2 at 2.12
microns and Fe II at 1.64 microns with Gemini Altair and GEMS/GSAOI adaptive
optics imaging programs over the course of the past five years.  Additionally
we have acquired near-infrared integral field spectra (data cubes) of the same
region covering the full JHK near-infrared window.

These measurements provide crucial information about the *full* 3D velocity
(proper motion & line-of-sight motion) and excitation conditions of the gas.

ALMA proposal:
However, they only trace the hot shock-excited gas, providing no *direct*
information about the total mass ejected in the explosion 500 years ago.  In
order to measure the energetics and mass loss from this event, we need to image
the flow in the sub-millimeter to identify both cold dust and cold molecular
gas.  

It is particularly essential to obtain high-resolution images in order to
distinguish the *ejecta* material (which may be entirely atomic!) from the
swept-up molecular material that composes the OMC1 Core.





Projects with the GSAOI and Altair data
---------------------------------------

# Proper motion and line-of-sight measurement of the H2 ejecta

  * Direct constraints on instantaneous energetics (shock speed)
  * Clues towards total energy ejected
  * Look for expansion perpendicular to the ejection vector
  * Key Questions:

    * How massive were the ejecta at launch?  
    * How much energy was involved in the Event?
    * What effect has the explosion had / will it have on the Core?

# Shock Physics (with Pat Hartigan?)
 
  * What are the excitation conditions in the shock knots?
  * Are there reverse shocks?
  * Why are some ejecta [Fe II]-bright while others are faint?  Is it purely
    extinction, or are some of the ejecta faster?
  * If there are faster ejecta, *why*?  What is driving them?

# Binarity & proper motion measurements of stars.  (with H. Bouy, J. Kolb et al?)
  These measurements are suitable for an undergraduate project:
  The student would Measure the centroids of all stars common to the Altair and
  GEMS images.

     * This requires precise measurements with accurate error bars, i.e. PSF
       fitting
     * Almost certainly will only be able to measure *relative* proper motion:
       absolute proper motion requires a larger-scale reference frame than is
       available in the AO images
     * May necessitate small-scale corrections to the images (but the stellar
       locations can be corrected without re-making the images)

  The key questions are:
     
     * What is the embedded binary population of the ONC?  (already very well
       known, this is only incremental new stuff)
     * What is the *dynamical state* of the ONC?
     * What does the dynamical state tell us about the ONC properties?  i.e., its boundedness, its
       internal mass, and its future evolution.

# Protostellar Systems 

     * We have found at least one new disk and one new Canto nozzle.
     * Are there any other new protostellar outflows?
     
